The Time Machine by Virgile Boraud

The time machine
      In the shadows of his laboratory, Doctor Henry Castafolte finishes
his invention. He is the latest in a long line of scientists and inventors to
imagine a machine of this kind, and the first to finalize his creation. It was
in 2077 that the first time machine saw the light of day. At first, the
discovery was made by pure chance, or serendipity in scientific jargon.
The inventor had been looking for a way to travel through time for 30
years. He tested a particle gas pedal, a black hole generator and even a
cat with buttered toast attached to its back (creating a paradox). Then,
exhausted by his many tests, he took a dish to be reheated and put it in
the microwave. The whole thing (not including the cat) created the first
time travel - his plate of nuggets had become a chicken again! However,
the scientist didn't stop there: inventing a machine is one thing, putting it
into practice is quite another. Everything had to be perfect, meticulous,
calculated to perfection. Indeed, the Mad Doctor, as he was known to the
scientific community, was notorious for his many disasters.       Most of his
inventions were flawed and approximate. His last project (30 years ago),
an attempt to digitize the human mind, had gone horribly wrong. After
realizing his condition, the project exterminated all the residents of the
infamous Aperture Science laboratory and took the life of his best friend,
Professor Doug Rattmann. After this disgrace, he went into exile and was
never heard from again.

The rescue
      If nobody comes back from the dead, maybe we can just save them
before they die. The existence of a time machine raises many ethical
questions, but when a friend's life is in your hands, the question doesn't
arise. Many wouldn't know what to do with such a machine, but Henry had
a very specific goal - to save his friend. But why not take a closer look.
Posing the question, if Doctor Castafolte's friend doesn't die, he'll never be
moved to make a time machine to come and save him, and therefore
won't be able to travel in time, which won't save the professor. A very
basic paradox. To get around this, the Doctor had drawn up a plan: save
him a few seconds before his death. In this way, the Henry of the past
would not know that Doug was alive and would persist in creating a time
machine. After a few days' preparation, Castafolte set off on his quest. The
first man to travel in time, the first return to the past!


      The first machine was rustic, and after assembling the microwave,
black hole generator and particle gas pedal into a cabin capable of holding
two people, the Doctor set himself up and nothing.... The counter read
2047 and the black hole had been created, but the machine didn't seem to
want to teleport to the laboratory. Then something struck Henry. Yes, of
course, the machine travels in time, no problem, but it doesn't travel in
space! A problem that may seem insignificant, but is in fact extremely
important. The universe is constantly moving, so if the machine only
travels in time without actually moving in space, the time traveler would
find himself in a vacuum. This had to be remedied. One obvious solution
was either to wait until the year 443,556 to find himself in the exact place
where the Earth was in 2047, or to set a precise point on the Earth and
teleport at the same time as traveling into the past. A much simpler
solution! In fact, the teleportation has now been commonplace for over 15 years. After a few
last-minute adjustments, Doctor Castafolte pressed the red button and
launched the device. Everything seemed viscous, liquid and yet so
tangible at the same time. A unique experience. The machine outside
gradually disappeared with a     deafening noise. When he opened the door
to his cabin, Henry was greeted by a shrill alarm echoing through a
gigantic underground complex, covered by cries of distress, the Aperture
Science laboratory in the year 2047.


      The precision of his own machine amazed him. First time, every
minute. But this is no time for celebration. A sick mind, imprisoned in the
body of a machine, is omnipotent throughout the laboratory and is killing
everyone in it, including him. We've got to do something, and fast! Doug is
close to the machine's control room and will die very soon if nothing is
done. What's more, he mustn't cross paths in the past - who knows what
will happen if he does. In the ruins of the center, many scientists' remains
were found, but not those of his friend. It was assumed that the body had
disintegrated completely in the explosion. Several reports on the black box
suggested that Doug was responsible, having sacrificed himself to prevent
the machine escaping. But Henry was certain of this: the only survivor of
the catastrophe, he tried to dissuade his friend from triggering the self-
destruct, but couldn't hold him back. Now he had to do everything in his
power to help him activate the mechanism and save him from his tragic
fate. His plan sound, and mentally prepared, he took the corridor leading
to the central room and saw Rattmann threatened by the dissident AI.
Then he rushed to the room where the "big red button© " was located to
activate it. A deafening bang followed, and the machine screamed in
agony. A gigantic black ball began to swell in the center of the room, and
the Professor, unconscious from the shock, began to be drawn into the
sphere. Without a second's respite, Henry rushed towards him and took
him on his shoulders before running and jumping into the machine. Barely
a second later, the ball would have sucked his friend in. Strangely enough,
there was no mention of the sphere anywhere, and no recollection of it in
the doctor's memories. But there was no time for reflection, and after
quickly installing Doug, he switched on his machine and disappeared
without a trace.

The Change
      Returning to the present, he settled Doug Rattmann on his sofa-bed
and rested on his footstool. After recovering from this exhausting event,
he suddenly stopped. He'd never had a sofa-bed or a footstool in his
laboratory. However, everything else seemed to be in place, and his
faithful cat-toast was still there when he arrived, and must really have
been washed (melted butter doesn't smell very good after 3 days out of
the fridge, and on a cat no less). He then realized that his time travel had
altered his reality. Not only was his friend alive, but the center didn't have
to be destroyed in this way. If harmless changes can happen, it's not silly
to think that more important ones may have taken place. It was then, as
he walked slowly towards his window, stressed, that he opened it and saw
a world... exactly like the one before. No, it was changing little by little, but
the changes were as minor as the roofs of houses changing from red to
black. His journey was beginning to have repercussions on the present.
But why such a sudden change? If the explosion had taken place normally,
nothing would have changed. It was then that he realized that the cause of
this sudden change was not the fact that Doug Rattmann was still alive,
but that the destruction had taken place differently from the first time. The
only possibility was that, somehow, the time machine had affected the
laboratory explosion and caused the creation of a black hole instead of a
conventional explosion. But the world is far more affected than that.
Minute by minute, it evolves, it changes. A voice stopped his reflection. His
friend's, the reason for all these changes (not the cause).


      A warm reunion was taking place. For Henry it was
It had b e e n 30 years since he'd last spoken to her, and for Doug it had
been 30 minutes. But his quick-witted friend knew right away that
something was wrong. What are we doing here? he wondered, and why
aren't we at the center anymore? I remember an alarm and you were...
but you looked so young. No, you look older now. Don't worry," replies
Henry, "I've saved you from the clutches of Fate, so you've nothing to fear.
After 30 seconds of silence, he looked at the Doctor's still-burning
machine, then saw the date on the calendar. Is this machine what I think it
is? said the Professor, slowly coming to his senses. It's a time machine. Did
you save my life by traveling through time? I've managed to reverse fate!
Henry exclaimed. They embraced, and after a few minutes, Dr. Castafolte
began to explain everything that had happened in the last 30 years. Then
a letter slipped under the door interrupted their reunion. Doug reflexively
grabbed it. The letter looked old, very old, half dirty, half burnt. After all,
letters had disappeared and all important messages were sent by e-mail
these days. The envelope had already been opened and the message
inside seemed to be in the same state. Intrigued by this new arrival, he
opened it.


                      You who shouldn't be here, You
                          who changed everything,
                             Together, find me,
                      Where everything seems to lead.
                                                             Psy ; Le Kongroo

The quest

      Intrigued by the letter and the person who had written it, the two
friends left the Doctor's laboratory. Although the person who had posted
the letter was no longer here, they had his name and a destination, albeit
not very precise. Looking around, they spotted a tag on the laboratory
letterbox. It read "Kongroo El Psy". Without really understanding, they
continued their search for this psychiatrist, looking all around for clues.
Their first instinct was to go back to the Aperture Science enrichment
center to pick up clues. And perhaps "where it all seems to lead" was the
very place where everything had changed, where the cause of all these
changes had taken place. They decided to take the teleporter first.
Direction: the Center!" Henry shouted. But it didn't work. To the next town,
then! exclaimed Henry. But nothing worked, teleportation was impossible.
So let's head for... the Car! That's if it works," said an annoyed Henry. That
is, if it works. So they took this archaic means of locomotion and headed
for the center. The further they drove towards Aperture, the more the
landscape changed, old clocks and futuristic watches beginning to appear
everywhere. Castafolte knew the feeling well: everything seemed viscous,
liquid and yet so tangible at the same time: a journey through time!


      He stopped the car dead in its tracks. They were in a room, no, a
long white corridor. This place looked like it hadn't seen a man in over 30
years. They got out of the car and began to walk around it. How did we
end up here?" asked Doug. I don't know, time travel's just been
discovered, and the only people who know about it are you and me,"
replied Henry. The two friends then took the initiative of walking carefully
along the corridor. The further they walked, the cleaner and newer the
walls looked. These were the corridors of the Aperture Science Enrichment
Center! After a few minutes, they spotted a room. Cautiously and
keeping their guard up, the Doctor and Professor entered the room. Giant
screens covered the room, and a chair and a computer were placed in its
center. Just then, the doors slammed shut with a deafening noise. Startled
by the noise and frightened by the thought of being locked in an
unfamiliar room, they had no time to recover their senses before the
screens lit up. A figure wearing a lab coat and standing from behind began
to speak:


      Greetings... I'm Le Kongroo. I know you're surprised and scared. I
also know that you're looking for something, or rather a cause, that
made everything change. So far, only small changes have been
observed. But the worst is yet to come. Where everything seems to be
leading is a dangerous direction. Above all, beware of Caroline and
doubt everything. Trust no one, good luck and jump. El Psy; Kongroo.


      The two colleagues were speechless. Who is this Caroline? Why a
message here? Why now? Why jump and into what? And above all, who is
this "Kongroo"? So many questions with no real answer. But no doubt
about it, the direction was the right one. The doors reopened and the two
companions set off in the opposite direction, settling into their car. After a
few moments, they watched their surroundings change. Everything
seemed viscous, liquid a n d yet so tangible at the same time. After
rematerializing, the car was next to the center, or rather what was left of
it: a huge black ball.


The meeting

       As he slowly approached the sphere, Professor Rattmann was lost in
thought: Caroline, Caroline, I know that name, but where does it come
from? On the other hand, Dr. Castafolte saw himself drawn to the globe,
and as he approached, he saw himself and his friend dying and dying ad
infinitum in a number of possible ways. Could it be another universe? Or
perhaps his own future. However, their thoughts were stopped by the
strange ball at the center of the ruins of Aperture: they were sucked in.
When they came to their senses, they were in the same corridor as their
previous encounter. Suddenly, a voice echoed in the recesses. A voice
similar to the one in the screen room, but somewhat dissonant:

GrEeTInGs... COMe quICKly, jOiN mE wHErE iT ALl bEGaN! eL PsY KoNgR..R....

   Although hesitant, the two friends agreed to head for the AI room. On
the way, no object, person or life was to be found. The center was
deserted. Although still on guard, Doug Rattmann began to think about
what might be there. Would he really meet this famous Le Kongroo, or
maybe.... It was in the airlock leading to the AI room that everything fell
into place. The AI was called CiDOS, CiDOS for Caroline inside Disk
Operator System (CuDOS). This Caroline was in fact the spirit that
inhabited the dissident AI's receptacle. But the Professor had taken too
long to think. And at the very second it all came to him, the airlock closed
on them. The voice he'd heard earlier became clearer and deeper:
   -   Oh, it's you! It's been a long time. How have you been? For my part,
       death has kept me very busy, you know, ever since you murdered
       me!
   -   Oh no! exclaimed Henry, not that!
   -   You know, I realized a lot of things the moment you pressed that
       "big red button©". One of them was that you weren't from around
       here. And given that you've endowed me with a great capacity for
       calculation, they'd have been foolish not to take advantage of it.
   -   You've recreated a time machine? replied Doctor Castafolte, mouth
       agape, as his friend tried to escape.
   -   More or less. CiDOS replied. The cat was particularly useful, but let's
       skip the details, they won't be useful when you're dead!


Prologue to the beginning and the end

      While the AI was talking, Doug found a way out of the airlock and
blew out one of the windows. Despite the noise, which CiDOS had heard, it
continued to speak as the two men tried to escape:
  -   You know, I've traveled through the   21st   century to change the course
      of time, there's no point in escaping. I wanted to cancel your
      existence, to nip the problem in the bud, literally. But your machine
      has many constraints.
  -   Hurry Henry, press the button while I keep him busy. Doug shouted
  -   There's no point in struggling, I've had plenty of time to prepare a
      plan. First: Neurotoxin.
A pipe then emerged from the ceiling and a green gas began to flow from
it.
  -   Second: I have....
  As the mad AI began its sentence, the Doctor pressed the
  "big red button©" and nothing....
  -   Secondly, I cut the button wires to deactivate myself.
  -   And Third: Let's just say the machine was... useful. First, I made
      some minor changes to test the machine, then I went off to retrieve
      information by killing you, over and over again. We're on the
      443,556th loop, but I'm getting tired of your faces. So long!
  A black orb began to cover CiDOS. Doug saw all his dead: 443,555 dead
plus one, far, far away, the first time. This one was different from the
others. Indeed, all the deaths had one thing in common: both died and the
world descended into AI-driven chaos, except for the first time, when only
he died and the world returned to normal. He saw Henry holding him back
from jumping into the black hole, and the loop began again and again. He
then understood Le Kongroo's words, "jump", and who he really was.
   -   I've figured out what I have to do to stop this massacre! exclaimed
       the Professor. You too have seen us die again and again. And you
       knew what to do about it all along, even if you don't know it yet.
   -   No! Don't go, we can find another solution! Henry shouted before
       seeing his friend jump into the sphere.
   -   Goodbye....
   As Doug jumped into the portal, it began to expand and contract
rapidly. These pulsations created lightning bolts and the walls of the room
began to distort. The black hole was becoming unstable and Henry had to
hurry to get out or he'd be sucked in. Saddened by the loss of his friend,
but wishing above all that he hadn't sacrificed himself for nothing, he ran
with all his strength out of the airlock linking the central hall to the rest of
the center. But too late, the black hole's powerful gravity pulled him into
it, and nothing.

Epilogue to the end and the beginning

        Nothing, emptiness, black, dark, obscure, oppressive. Then, an
explosion, heat, light, matter, the Sun, the Earth. At last, Doctor Henry
Castafolte came to his senses. Everything around him seemed viscous,
liquid and yet so tangible at the same time, and his vision was blurred. He
found himself in a room whose walls were covered with screens. In its
center, a chair, a computer, a lab coat and a clean white letter as if it had
just been bought. Without missing a beat, he slips on the lab coat and
notices a phone in his pocket. Not just any phone: his own. Opening it, he
notices that 443,555 videos have been taken and inadvertently starts
recording a new one. Surprised, he drops the phone, understands the
situation, puts his back to the camera and begins to declaim the following
text:

        Greetings... I'm Le Kongroo. I know you're surprised and scared. I
also know that you're looking for something, or rather a cause, that
made everything change. So far, only small changes have been
observed. But the worst is yet to come. Where everything seems to be
leading is a dangerous direction. Above all, beware of Caroline and
doubt everything. Trust no one, good luck and jump. El Psy; Kongroo.

        He sent the message to the computer. At last he knew everything,
who the Kongroo was, what the message was that kept popping up
everywhere: "El Psy Kongroo". A signal, a light to guide him and Doug to
the best possible end. A beacon in the darkness that is time travel. He
wrote the following letter:

                      You who shouldn't be here, You
                         who changed everything,
                              Together, find me,
                      Where everything seems to lead.
                                                    Psy ; Le Kongroo

Finally, he left the room. Then he heard footsteps and voices. It was
them, Rattmann and Castafolte, advancing on guard. He discreetly hid and
let out a tear in memory of his friend, whom he would never see again.
Then, after the two had re-entered the room, he closed it with a bang and
started the recording. A portal opened before his eyes, taking him back to
his laboratory. He tagged his letterbox with "Kongroo El Psy;" then slid the
letter through the slot in the door. Just then, he felt himself being sucked
back in and the door opened. When he came to his senses, Doctor
Castafolte was at home, no sofa-bed or footstool, but a good old-fashioned
synthetic leather sofa and comfortable chairs. He rushed to destroy his
machine and his plans. What belongs to the past belongs to the past. What
happens in the present is for the future. And anyone who tries to tame
time will find himself a prisoner of his past.
